CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to vodozemac

Thank you for taking the time to contribute to Matrix!

This is the repository for Vodozemac, a Rust implementation of Olm and Megolm.

# Writing changelog entries

We aim to maintain clear and informative changelogs that accurately reflect the
changes in our project. This guide will help you write useful changelog entries
using git-cliff, which fetches changelog entries from commit messages. 

## Commit Message Format

Commit messages should be formatted as Conventional Commits. In addition, some
git trailers are supported and have special meaning (see below).

### Conventional Commits

Conventional Commits are structured as follows:

```
<type>(<scope>): <short summary>
```

The type of changes which will be included in changelogs is one of the following:

    feat: A new feature
    fix: A bug fix
    doc: Documentation changes
    refactor: Code refactoring
    perf: Performance improvements
    ci: Changes to CI configuration files and scripts

The scope is optional and can specify the area of the codebase affected (e.g.,
olm, cipher).

### Changelog Trailer

In addition to the Conventional Commit format, you can use the `Changelog` git
trailer to specify the changelog message explicitly. When that trailer is
present, its value will be used as the changelog entry instead of the commit's
leading line.


#### Example Commit Message
```
feat: Add a method to encode Ed25519 public keys to Base64

This patch adds the Ed25519PublicKey::to_base64() method, which allows us to
stringify Ed25519 and thus present them to users. It's also commonly used when
Ed25519 keys need to be inserted into JSON.  

Changelog: Added the Ed25519PublicKey::to_base64() method which can be used to
stringify the Ed25519 public key.
```

In this commit message, the content specified in the `Changelog` trailer will be
used for the changelog entry.

### Security fixes

Commits addressing security vulnerabilities must include specific trailers for
vulnerability metadata. These commits are required to include at least the
`Security-Impact` trailer to indicate that the commit is a security fix.

Security issues have some additional git-trailers:

    Security-Impact: The magnitude of harm that can be expected, i.e. low/moderate/high/critical.
    CVE: The CVE that was assigned to this issue.
    GitHub-Advisory: The GitHub advisory identifier.

Example:

```
fix: Use a constant-time Base64 encoder for secret key material

This patch fixes a security issue around a side-channel vulnerability[1]
when decoding secret key material using Base64.

In some circumstances an attacker can obtain information about secret
secret key material via a controlled-channel and side-channel attack.

This patch avoids the side-channel by switching to the base64ct crate
for the encoding, and more importantly, the decoding of secret key
material.

Security-Impact: Low
CVE: CVE-2024-40640
GitHub-Advisory: GHSA-j8cm-g7r6-hfpq

Changelog: Use a constant-time Base64 encoder for secret key material
to mitigate side-channel attacks leaking secret key material.
```

## Sign off

We ask that everybody who contributes to this project signs off their
contributions, as explained below.

We follow a simple 'inbound=outbound' model for contributions: the act of
submitting an 'inbound' contribution means that the contributor agrees to
license their contribution under the same terms as the project's overall
'outbound' license - in our case, this is Apache Software License v2 (see
[LICENSE](./LICENSE)).

In order to have a concrete record that your contribution is intentional and you
agree to license it under the same terms as the project's license, we've adopted
the same lightweight approach used by the [Linux
Kernel](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/submitting-patches.html),
[Docker](https://github.com/docker/docker/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md), and many
other projects: the [Developer Certificate of
Origin](https://developercertificate.org/) (DCO). This is a simple declaration
that you wrote the contribution or otherwise have the right to contribute it to
Matrix:

```
Developer Certificate of Origin
Version 1.1

Copyright (C) 2004, 2006 The Linux Foundation and its contributors.
660 York Street, Suite 102,
San Francisco, CA 94110 USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.

Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
    have the right to submit it under the open source license
    indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
    of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
    license and I have the right under that license to submit that
    work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
    by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
    permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
    in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
    person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
    it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
    are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
    personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
    maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
    this project or the open source license(s) involved.
```

If you agree to this for your contribution, then all that's needed is to include
the line in your commit or pull request comment:

```
Signed-off-by: Your Name <your@email.example.org>
```

Git allows you to add this signoff automatically when using the `-s` flag to
`git commit`, which uses the name and email set in your `user.name` and
`user.email` git configs.

Commit message:

chore: Allow the usage of the breaking-change trailer for changelog entries

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to vodozemac

Thank you for taking the time to contribute to Matrix!

This is the repository for Vodozemac, a Rust implementation of Olm and Megolm.

# Writing changelog entries

We aim to maintain clear and informative changelogs that accurately reflect the
changes in our project. This guide will help you write useful changelog entries
using git-cliff, which fetches changelog entries from commit messages. 

## Commit Message Format

Commit messages should be formatted as Conventional Commits. In addition, some
git trailers are supported and have special meaning (see below).

### Conventional Commits

Conventional Commits are structured as follows:

```
<type>(<scope>): <short summary>
```

The type of changes which will be included in changelogs is one of the following:

    feat: A new feature
    fix: A bug fix
    doc: Documentation changes
    refactor: Code refactoring
    perf: Performance improvements
    ci: Changes to CI configuration files and scripts

The scope is optional and can specify the area of the codebase affected (e.g.,
olm, cipher).

### Changelog Trailer

In addition to the Conventional Commit format, you can use the `Changelog` git
trailer to specify the changelog message explicitly. When that trailer is
present, its value will be used as the changelog entry instead of the commit's
leading line. The `Breaking-Change` git trailer can be used in a similar manner
if the changelog entry should be marked as a breaking change.


#### Example Commit Message
```
feat: Add a method to encode Ed25519 public keys to Base64

This patch adds the Ed25519PublicKey::to_base64() method, which allows us to
stringify Ed25519 and thus present them to users. It's also commonly used when
Ed25519 keys need to be inserted into JSON.  

Changelog: Added the Ed25519PublicKey::to_base64() method which can be used to
stringify the Ed25519 public key.
```

In this commit message, the content specified in the `Changelog` trailer will be
used for the changelog entry.

### Security fixes

Commits addressing security vulnerabilities must include specific trailers for
vulnerability metadata. These commits are required to include at least the
`Security-Impact` trailer to indicate that the commit is a security fix.

Security issues have some additional git-trailers:

    Security-Impact: The magnitude of harm that can be expected, i.e. low/moderate/high/critical.
    CVE: The CVE that was assigned to this issue.
    GitHub-Advisory: The GitHub advisory identifier.

Example:

```
fix: Use a constant-time Base64 encoder for secret key material

This patch fixes a security issue around a side-channel vulnerability[1]
when decoding secret key material using Base64.

In some circumstances an attacker can obtain information about secret
secret key material via a controlled-channel and side-channel attack.

This patch avoids the side-channel by switching to the base64ct crate
for the encoding, and more importantly, the decoding of secret key
material.

Security-Impact: Low
CVE: CVE-2024-40640
GitHub-Advisory: GHSA-j8cm-g7r6-hfpq

Changelog: Use a constant-time Base64 encoder for secret key material
to mitigate side-channel attacks leaking secret key material.
```

## Sign off

We ask that everybody who contributes to this project signs off their
contributions, as explained below.

We follow a simple 'inbound=outbound' model for contributions: the act of
submitting an 'inbound' contribution means that the contributor agrees to
license their contribution under the same terms as the project's overall
'outbound' license - in our case, this is Apache Software License v2 (see
[LICENSE](./LICENSE)).

In order to have a concrete record that your contribution is intentional and you
agree to license it under the same terms as the project's license, we've adopted
the same lightweight approach used by the [Linux
Kernel](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/submitting-patches.html),
[Docker](https://github.com/docker/docker/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md), and many
other projects: the [Developer Certificate of
Origin](https://developercertificate.org/) (DCO). This is a simple declaration
that you wrote the contribution or otherwise have the right to contribute it to
Matrix:

```
Developer Certificate of Origin
Version 1.1

Copyright (C) 2004, 2006 The Linux Foundation and its contributors.
660 York Street, Suite 102,
San Francisco, CA 94110 USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.

Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
    have the right to submit it under the open source license
    indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
    of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
    license and I have the right under that license to submit that
    work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
    by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
    permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
    in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
    person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
    it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
    are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
    personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
    maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
    this project or the open source license(s) involved.
```

If you agree to this for your contribution, then all that's needed is to include
the line in your commit or pull request comment:

```
Signed-off-by: Your Name <your@email.example.org>
```

Git allows you to add this signoff automatically when using the `-s` flag to
`git commit`, which uses the name and email set in your `user.name` and
`user.email` git configs.
